+++
author = "albuquru"
date = 2021-01-02T05:00:00Z
draft = true
subtitle = ""
title = "Does a VAT rise harm the tourism industry? Portuguese evidence"

+++
The recent paper of Cesario and Irina Mateus published in Tourism Management Journal raises the question of whether a significant increase in VAT rates harms the tourism industry and to what extent. It investigates the consequences of a dramatic jump in VAT rates on firm profitability and survival_._ The magnitude of potential distress on the tourism industry has been analysed based on the evidence from Portugal, where the government introduced a ten percent VAT rise on catering services, restaurant meals, and beverages in 2011. It is widely known, that in the event of tax changes small and medium-size firms are affected the most, at the same time SMEs are essential contributors to job creation and economic development. The tourism sector in Portugal represents the biggest sector of the economy, hence understanding the potential inferences of future tax-related proposals is essential. The paper analyzed 23,388 Portuguese firms related to food and beverage service activities, the analysis is based on the accounting data obtained for the period from 2003 to 2013. The results show that the consequences of the ten percent VAT rise in Portugal were much more harmful to the tourism sector than the financial crisis. The average decrease in EBITDA levels after the tax introduction reached 9.4 percent versus 1.15 percent for the 2008-2009 years. Further tests highlighted that the highest decline of 8.7% in profits of Portuguese firms occurred in the year after the implementation of the VAT reform. In the years 2012-2013 the ratio of inactive versus active firms rose to 8.1% and 9%, respectively, compared to 2-3% during the time of the financial crisis. Moreover, the results revealed that the implemented VAT change increased the probability of a firm to go bankrupt by about three times. Following the outcomes, the paper suggests that such dramatic consequences of a significant VAT increase will inevitably affect unemployment and may cause a slump in tax revenue in the long run. The example of Portugal shows that a significant VAT increase on restaurant meals and beverages has negative consequences for the tourism industry and may harm the country’s economy. Thus, the authors conclude that the evidence of Portugal can be applied to all other countries considering significant VAT changes. Hence, it is essential for a government to understand potential repercussions to the economy before suggesting a significant jump in VAT rates.