+++
author = ""
date = 2021-12-14T05:00:00Z
draft = true
subtitle = ""
title = "Fluctuations in the wage gap between vocational and general secondary education"

+++
What type of education gives the best preparation for the labour market? Vocational education, where you learn the skills for specific occupations? Or a more general education, advancing intellectual and cultural development? It’s an old question in the economics of education literature. The common presumption is that vocational education gives an initial advantage, as the graduate has been trained for specific jobs, and can perform required tasks right-away, but that the general graduate is better prepared for future changes in the labour market, as broader intellectual skills facilitate learning new tasks. In summary: the vocational graduate is ready to perform, the general graduate is prepared for new challenges. Vocational graduates may start with higher wages, but general graduates may make up and earn more towards the end of working life.

Secondary education in Portugal is an interesting case to study this question, as it offers the choice between these two types of schooling, but not always in the same way. Before the Carnation Revolution that started in 1974, there was a traditional system for vocational education with focus on industrial and craft occupations, after the Revolution there was a modern system with broader coverage of types of occupation and less vocational content in the curriculum,

while during the revolutionary period, the distinction was formally abolished, but in practice often lived on, thus creating a rather fuzzy system. When we study labour market outcomes, we have to acknowledge that workers of different ages have been educated in different school systems. We found that the reforms have indeed affected the wage gaps.

We compare five age cohorts of workers born between 1951 and 1994 and measure the wage differential among graduates from secondary education with a vocational and a general curriculum. For four cohorts, vocational wages are always below general wages. Only for the youngest cohort, observed until age 33, vocational wages are higher than general wages. When we follow the institutional history of secondary education, as the traditional system before the Carnation Revolution of 1974, the fuzzy situation during that Revolution and the modern system thereafter, we find crude, unconditional wage gaps of 4, 10 and 5%. However, if workers of different educational tracks were randomly distributed across firms the gap would disappear. This means that firms take the opportunity to pay less to vocational workers although there does not seem to be any objective reason for that given that the average productivity is indistinguishable between the two groups.

Careful statistical and econometric analyses confirm this U-shaped pattern in the wage disadvantage for vocational secondary education: it first increases and then decreases, almost to extinction for the youngest cohort. We relate the development to the change in worker-firm matching that in the end works out more favourably for vocational graduates than for general graduates. In particular, in the later cohorts low ability vocational graduates were more successful in finding employment at higher wage firms than low ability general graduates. Or, framed conversely, low ability general graduates lost their advantage over low ability vocational graduates in high wage firms.

There may be a relationship with two changes in the educational system that have made general and vocational education more similar. First, in the traditional system, the differentiation between general and vocational education covered 5 school years, in the modern system it covers only 3 years. Second, the curriculum of vocational education has changed. Compared to the traditional system, the modern system of vocational education has moved towards more weight for the general component. The shift towards a larger component of general education can be interpreted as an increased emphasis on developing cognitive skills rather than manual and other skills.

A coherent interpretation might be that the traditional vocational education lost relevance for the labour market when the economy was restructured after the 1980s, and that the reorganisation of vocational education, increasing the weight of building cognitive skills and preparing for new jobs in the service sector of the economy improved the relative position of vocational graduates in the high wage firms. That would make the overhaul of vocational education at the secondary level a successful policy intervention.